Introduction
------------

Erlcunia is a small tool I built to practise ear training exercises. I started
using solfege, but it didn't match my needs and wasn't easy to customise (this
was back in 2006).

My goal was:

  * Make easy to write new lessons, at the moment of writing this I was
    intensive with interval recognition, but later I moved to triad, chord, and
    scale recognition and didn't have to change anything in the lesson engine.
  * Make it repeat wrong answers against the question. It's much easier to learn
    this way and if I recall right, solfege didn't do that.

So it was easy, no bells, nor whistles. It doesn't even have a fancy GUI since I
fell quite comfortable as it is right now.

FAQ
---
Why erlang? -- Why not :) It's easy to me write things in erlang, but any other
high level language would be fine as well

Why Erlcunia? -- Obviously, Erl comes from erlang. Cunia is difficult to
explain, it has to do with a music teacher I had. I would't say more. Anyway,
I made it more natural calling cunia notation to the music representation I
chose and calling cunia to each music unit so I can say it's Erlcunia because is
the erlang way of playing cunias :)

Compiling
---------

If you have erlang in your execution path, just typing make should work.

Alternatively, you can use erlware to build it. Just type sinan in any directory
in erlcunia. In this case you must be sure that:

  * Erlcunia sits in a directory named erlcunia, sinan is way strict when
    enforcing OTP principles and the directory must have the same name as the
    applciation (with an optional version)

  * Use a sinan version greater than 0.17.1.1. This, and earlier versions, hang
    when compiling standalone applications. At the moment of writing these
    lines, such version didn't exist, but there is a fix in commit
    15c4d24a82e3b698d673 in my own sinan fork:
    git://github.com/samuelrivas/sinan.git

Running
-------

You need timidity installed in /usr/bin/timidity. If you want to change that
location, just edit the src/erlcunia_midi_player.erl file and recompile.

To run erlcunia, evaluate next functions in the erlang shell:

application:start(erlcunia).
erlcunia_lesson_tutor:load_lesson("<path_to_erlcunia>/priv/lessons/triads.txt").
erlcunia_lesson_tutor:new_test().

If everything worked you should hear a grand piano playing a triad. Repeating
the last command will get you more different triads.

To see the possible answers:

erlcunia_lesson_tutor:get_all_tests().

To test an answer:

erlcunia_lesson_tutor:test_answer(major).

If you fail, you'll hear your choice compared to the test.

To hear the test again:

erlcunia_lesson_tutor:repeat_test().

There are various undocumented ways to customize the tutor, just read the code
or wait until I decide to document them ;)

Additionally to the triads lesson, at the time of writing these lines, Erlcunia
also includes a forward church tone scale lesson, an intervals lesson, a 4 note
regular chord lesson, and a tetrachord lesson. Next sections show how to write
new lessons if you like to.

Cunia Notation
--------------

  Internally, erlcunia uses the so called cunia notation to represent music.
Cunia notation is a list of cunia events:

  Cunia = [CuniaEvent].
  CuniaEvent = {notes, [Note], Length} | {rest, Length}
  Note = integer(), {integer(), tie}
  Length = BaseLength | {tuplet, integer(), integer(), BaseLength}
  BaseLength = 1 | 2 | 4 | 8 ...

  The tie length is added to the previous length of tied note.

  Second integer value in the tuplet value is the number of subdivisions in the
BaseLength note. First integer value is the amount of those subdivisions to
count for the note length.

  For example, a quarter note triplet is represented as follows: {tuplet, 1, 3,
4} and two swing eigth notes may be written as follows: {tuplet, 2, 3, 4} and
{tuplet, 1, 3, 4}

  * Cunia examples:

  - [{notes, [10,20], 4}, {notes, [{10, tie}, 20], 8}, {rest, 8}, {rest, 4}, {notes, [10], 4}]

  - In priv/st_thomas.cunia file you can see a short study on Sonny Rollins's St
    Thomas standard. You can load it to the erlang shell by calling

       {ok, [StThomas]} = file:consult(FileLocation)

  erlcunia_midi_player:play(Cunia) plays the Cunia using a external midi
player. You can try it with the previous examples. The first one is not very
musical, but StThomas should play nice.

  Cunia notation is converted to midi with a intermediate step. In that step,
Cunias are translated to an "Event List." An event list is a list of tuples like
{Event, Note, Pulse}, where:

  - Event is either note_on or note_off.
  - Note is the midi note (an integer).
  - Pulse is the time of the event in absolute pulse (they are translated to
    relative pulses in midi binaries).

  This list is ordered by Pulse, so midi translation is straightforward.

Lesson format
-------------

  A lesson is basically a list of relative cunias (first note is 0) paired to a
tag to identify each of them:

  Lesson = [{questions, [Question]}]
  Question = {Cunia, Tag}
  Tag = atom()

  The lesson player automatically transposes the relative cunia to a random
pitch and plays it in the cunia player. The cuia tutor knows the tag for
currently playing question and copares it to what you think it's the answer.
